---
title: "Jericho - Weeks 10-15"
layout: post
---

> New and improved.

So I took a few weeks off of the weekly updates. Fortunately, I took the opportunity to go even harder on development.

There's a lot to cover, so strap in.

### General Direction

The "wave defense" direction has come to an end. The original purpose of that was to tune controls and combat. With that working, it is time to move on to the actual game.

Here is a peek at the established art direction for Jericho:

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/basic_character.gif" title="Basic character" caption="A player character with some basic armor equipped." %}

### Character Customization

At its core, Jericho is a game focused on collection and customization. Players can customize cosmetics and equipment, yielding a unique appearance that they can show off to friends and foes.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/basic_customization.gif" title="Basic customization" caption="Cycling through a few pieces." %}

#### **Cosmetics**

Player cosmetics are customizations to the characters base look, including hair, ears, and face.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/cosmetics.gif" title="Character cosmetics" caption="Swapping hair, ears, and face types." %}


#### **Equipment**

A player's armor is a chance to improve your character, while also looking like the custom badass you want to be. Do you want to be lightweight and nimble, or slow but heavily armored? Or maybe you simply want others to turn and look at how awesome you are. 

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/varieties.png" title="Character varieties" caption="You can equip matching armor to get a full look going." %}

Equipment is broken out into helmet and armor slots, and might include a "waist" or "belt" slot in the future.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/random.gif" title="Random" caption="Hitting random a few times can generate some interesting results." %}

One mechanic being considered is the notion of an equipment "level." With this, equipment would gain experience over time, level up, and become stronger. Raiding an enemy and stealing their equipment would maintain the level, allowing some loot to be better than others.

Similarly, equipment may have a prefix and suffix system. This would be small modifiers placed on equipment to make them slightly varied. For example, a Knight Chestplate may have modifiers that turn it into a "Great Knight Chestplate of Agility". The "Great" prefix may increase the stats it provides, while the "of Agility" suffix may increase player movement speed while equipped.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/paladin2.png" title="Paladin" caption="A full paladin set. The sword swings slow, but packs a big punch." %}

#### **Weapons**

Similar to armor, a player can collect and choose between a variety of weapons to use. Each weapon has unique properties, including attack range, speed, and damage.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/dagger.gif" title="Dagger" caption="The dagger attacks quickly, but has a short range and does not do much damage." %}

In addition to melee weapons, players can equip and use projectiles for ranged attacks.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/rocks.gif" title="Throwing rocks" caption="Throwing rocks at the dummy. Similar to before, you can hover in the air while attacking or throwing." %}

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/axes.gif" title="Throwing axe" caption="Throwing an axe at the dummy. These stick into the dummy rather than bouncing off." %}

### How is it done?

Quite a bit of effort has gone into character customization. It's the main reason I haven't created weekly updates lately. Here is a peek under the hood at some of the specifics.

#### **Defining Items**

Items are split between _definitions_ and _outfits_. Definitions contain the item statistics, while the outfit defines in-game properties, such as visuals or custom positional data. This allows definitions to be defined anywhere, such as a backend server, while the in-game data can link to specific sprites and assets.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/dagger_db.png" title="Dagger definition" caption="The definition for the Curved Dagger." %}

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/knight_db.png" title="Knight outfit" caption="The outfit details for the Knight body." %}

Once assets are created, it is quite easy to add new outfits. We just need to define some new ScriptableObjects and configure them through the editor UI.

#### **Skeletal Animation**

The characters are assembled as puppets and contain a skeletal system. Animations are done in Spine and exported to Unity. This allows animations to be created once, and reused across any outfit combination.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/spine.gif" title="Run animation" caption="The run animation in Spine. Note that the Spine animation doesn't show some things, such as hair. Those are rendered at runtime based on the hair bone's position for reasons I might explain later..." %}

The animation style is loosely based on an analysis of Castle Crasher videos. Specifically, the attack animation is less about the swing itself and more about the wind-up.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/attack_slow.gif" title="Attack animation" caption="A slowed down version of the first swing on the attack animation." %}

By doing it this way, you can actually get away with only have a single weapon sprite. There is not need to draw the weapon at different angles. First, the weapon is in front of the player. After a wind-up, the weapon is instantly on the other side of the player. In addition to making it easy, it also adds a bit of power to the swing. At runtime, an arc trail is drawn to cover some of the ugliness.

#### **Swapping outfits**

As the player swaps equipment, a component called an _OutfitHolder_ is notified of changes and updates the players visual representation. Specifically, a Spine skin is generated at runtime, and all of the necessary images are assembled.

One challenge of this approach is needing to handle sprite swaps within an animation. For example, when the player attacks, the face sprite swaps from "Idle" to "Grunt". However, we need to swap between the Idle and Grunt sprites of the currently equipped face.

#### **Hair and Eyebrows**

The player's eyebrows are defined as a part of the face, as they need to be placed according to the eyes. However, the color needs to be determined by the hair. So how is this done?

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/faces.png" title="Faces" caption="Faces before being exported to Unity." %}

Eyebrows are colored in grayscale to allow for runtime coloring with proper shading. The eyebrows are also exported separately from the faces and drawn in a different Spine slot.

When the _OutfitHolder_ component detects a change in hair, it will update the Color property of the eyebrow renderer.

{% include image.html img="/assets/images/weeks10-14/hair_color.gif" title="Hair color" caption="The eyebrow color is being updated according to the hair, even though the eyebrow image is bound to the face type." %}

### Up Next

Next up will be work on the player inventory and equipment menu. Most of the work here will be updating the UI logic to support controllers.
